DOCSP-39699 bulk writes page (#64)
mongodb/docs-java-rs: source/write-operations/bulk-writes.txt

.. _java-rs-bulk-write:

=====================
Bulk Write Operations
=====================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: insert, update, replace, code example

Overview
--------

> 

Reviewer: S: before explaining the hypothetical situtaiton, add an introductory sentence here (like the [C++ page](https://preview-mongodbnorareidy.gatsbyjs.io/cpp-driver/DOCSP-40794-bulk-write/write/bulk-write/#customize-bulk-write-operations)).

Consider a scenario in which you want to insert a document into a collection,
update multiple other documents, then delete a document. If you use
individual methods, each operation requires its own database call. This guide
shows you how to use bulk write operations to perform multiple write operations
in a single database call.

Sample Data
~~~~~~~~~~~

> The examples in this guide use the ``sample_restaurants.restaurants`` collection

Reviewer: S: [nit] since this is a namespace rather than a collection, reword to something like:
```suggestion
The examples in this guide use the ``restaurants`` collection in the ``sample_restaurants`` database
```

Author: Because the other write/read pages, such as: https://preview-mongodbshuangela.gatsbyjs.io/java-rs/DOCSP-39699-bulk-write/write-operations/insert-documents/ use sample_restaurants.restaurants and this is a convention I've established, I'm going to keep it as is

:ref:`<java-rs-getting-started>` tutorial.

.. include:: /includes/reactor-note.rst

Define the Write Operations
---------------------------

For each write operation you want to perform, create an instance of one of
the following classes:

- ``InsertOneModel``
- ``UpdateOneModel``
- ``UpdateManyModel``
- ``ReplaceOneModel``
- ``DeleteOneModel``
- ``DeleteManyModel``

Then, pass a list of these instances to the ``bulkWrite()`` method.

The following sections show how to create and use instances of the preceding classes.

Insert Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To perform an insert operation, create an instance of ``InsertOneModel`` and
pass in the document you want to insert.

The following example creates an instance of ``InsertOneModel``:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/write/bulk-write.java
   :start-after: start-bulk-insert-one
   :end-before: end-bulk-insert-one
   :language: java
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

To insert multiple documents, create an instance of ``InsertOneModel`` for each document.

Update Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To update a document, create an instance of ``UpdateOneModel`` and pass in
the following arguments:

> - **Query filter** that specifies the criteria used to match documents in your collection

Reviewer: S: per the [style guide](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/style/lists/#list-items) ("In a list of fragments, some or all of which are followed by sentences, use punctuation at the end of every fragment and sentence in the list"):
```suggestion
- **Query filter** that specifies the criteria used to match documents in your collection.
```

.. literalinclude:: /includes/write/bulk-write.java
   :start-after: start-bulk-update-one
   :end-before: end-bulk-update-one
   :language: java
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

To update multiple documents, create an instance of ``UpdateManyModel`` and pass in
the same arguments. ``UpdateManyModel`` updates *all* documents that match your query
filter.

The following example creates an instance of ``UpdateManyModel``:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/write/bulk-write.java
   :start-after: start-bulk-update-many
   :end-before: end-bulk-update-many
   :language: java
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

Replace Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A replace operation removes all fields and values of a specified document and
replaces them with new ones. To perform a replace operation, create an instance
of ``ReplaceOneModel`` and pass in a query filter and the fields and values you want
to store in the matching document.

The following example creates an instance of ``ReplaceOneModel``:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/write/bulk-write.java
   :start-after: start-bulk-replace-one
   :end-before: end-bulk-replace-one
   :language: java
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

> To replace multiple documents, you must create an instance of ``ReplaceOneModel`` for each document.

Reviewer: S: to match the syntax of the other sections:
```suggestion
To replace multiple documents, create an instance of ``ReplaceOneModel`` for each document.
```

Delete Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To delete a document, create an instance of ``DeleteOneModel`` and pass in a
query filter specifying the document you want to delete. ``DeleteOneModel`` removes
only *the first* document that matches your query filter.

The following example creates an instance of ``DeleteOneModel``:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/write/bulk-write.java
   :start-after: start-bulk-delete-one
   :end-before: end-bulk-delete-one
   :language: java
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

To delete multiple documents, create an instance of ``DeleteManyModel`` and pass in a

> query filter specifying the document you want to delete. ``DeleteManyModel`` removes

Reviewer: S: [nit] make this plural
```suggestion
query filter specifying the documents you want to delete. ``DeleteManyModel`` removes
```

*all* documents that match your query filter.

The following example creates an instance of ``DeleteManyModel``:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/write/bulk-write.java
   :start-after: start-bulk-delete-many
   :end-before: end-bulk-delete-many
   :language: java
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

Call the ``bulkWrite()`` Method
--------------------------------

After you define a class instance for each operation you want to perform,
pass a list of these instances to the ``bulkWrite()`` method.
By default, the method runs the operations in the order
they're defined in the list.

The following example performs multiple write operations by using the
``bulkWrite()`` method:

> .. io-code-block::

Reviewer: I: looks like there's an rST error that's preventing the io code block from rendering. I'm not sure what the issue is; maybe remove the :copyable: and see if that works?

   .. input:: /includes/write/bulk-write.java
      :start-after: start-bulk-write-mixed
      :end-before: end-bulk-write-mixed
      :language: java
      :copyable:
      :dedent:

   .. output::
      
      AcknowledgedBulkWriteResult{insertedCount=2, matchedCount=2, removedCount=1, modifiedCount=2, upserts=[], inserts=[BulkWriteInsert{index=0, id=BsonObjectId{value=66a3cebad6d5d5070c7883e3}}, BulkWriteInsert{index=1, id=BsonObjectId{value=66a3cebad6d5d5070c7883e4}}]}

If any of the write operations fail, the {+driver-short+} raises a
``BulkWriteError`` and does not perform any further operations.
``BulkWriteError`` provides a ``details`` attribute that includes the operation

> that failed, and details about the exception.

Reviewer: S: [nit] remove the comma, as it doesn't precede an independent clause
```suggestion
that failed and details about the exception.
```

.. note::

   When the {+driver-short+} runs a bulk operation, it uses the ``writeConcern`` of the

>    collection in which the operation is running. The driver reports all write

Reviewer: S:
```suggestion
   collection on which the operation is running. The driver reports all write
```

   concern errors after attempting all operations, regardless of execution order. 

Customize Bulk Write Operations
-------------------------------

The ``BulkWriteOptions`` class contains methods that modify
the behavior of the ``bulkWrite()`` method. To use the ``BulkWriteOptions``
class, construct a new instance of the class, then call one or more of its methods

> to modify the delete operation. You can chain these method calls together.

Reviewer: I: why do these only modify delete operations? Or do all mentions of "delete operation" in this section need to be replaced with "bulk operation"?

To modify the behavior of the delete operation, pass the class instance and
chained method calls as the last argument to the
``bulkWrite()`` method.

You can use the following methods in the ``BulkWriteOptions`` class
to modify a delete method. All methods are optional.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 30 70
   :header-rows: 1

>    * - Property

Reviewer: S: rename to "Method" to match the introductory text
```suggestion
   * - Method
```

         Server manual.

   * - ``comment(Bson comment)``
     - | Attaches a ``Bson`` comment to the operation. For more information, see the :manual:`insert command
         fields </reference/command/insert/#command-fields>` guide in the
         MongoDB Server manual.  

   * - ``comment(String comment)``
     - | Attaches a ``String`` comment to the operation. For more information, see the :manual:`insert command
         fields </reference/command/insert/#command-fields>` guide in the
         MongoDB Server manual.  

   * - ``let(Bson variables)``
     - | Specifies a map of parameter names and values. Values must be constant or closed
         expressions that don't reference document fields. For more information,
         see the :manual:`let statement
         </reference/command/update/#std-label-update-let-syntax>` in the
         MongoDB Server manual.

   * - ``ordered(Boolean ordered)``
     - | If set to ``True``, the driver sends documents to the
         server in the order provided. If an error occurs, the driver
         and server cancel all remaining write operations.
       | Defaults to ``True``. 

> The following example calls the ``bulkWrite()`` method from the preceding example, with the ``ordered`` option set

Reviewer: S: to avoid "with":
```suggestion
The following example calls the ``bulkWrite()`` method from the preceding example but sets the ``ordered`` option
```

to ``False``:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/write/bulk-write.java
   :start-after: start-bulk-write-unordered
   :end-before: end-bulk-write-unordered
   :language: java
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

> 

Reviewer: S: since this code snippet has a print statement, include an output here

If any of the write operations in an unordered bulk write fail, the {+driver-short+}
reports the errors only after attempting all operations.

.. note::

   Unordered bulk operations do not guarantee order of execution. The order can
   differ from the way you list them to optimize the runtime.

Return Value
------------

The ``bulkWrite()`` method returns a ``BulkWriteResult`` object. The

> ``BulkWriteResult`` object contains the following properties.

Reviewer: S: add a colon. Also, "methods" might be a better word than "properties."
```suggestion
``BulkWriteResult`` object contains the following methods:
```

.. list-table::
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Property
     - Description

   * - .. code-block:: none
          :copyable: false

           acknowledged(int insertedCount,
           int matchedCount,
           int removedCount, Integer modifiedCount,
           List<BulkWriteUpsert> upserts,
           List<BulkWriteInsert> inserts)

     - | Indicates if the server acknowledged the write operation.
   
   * - .. code-block:: none
          :copyable: false

           acknowledged(com.mongodb
           .internal.bulk
           .WriteRequest.Type type,
           int count,
           Integer modifiedCount,
           List<BulkWriteUpsert> upserts,
           List<BulkWriteInsert> inserts)

     - | Indicates if the server acknowledged the write operation.
         
   * - ``getDeletedCount()``
     - | Gets the number of documents deleted, if any.

   * - ``getInsertedCount()``
     - | Gets the number of documents inserted, if any.

   * - ``getInserts()``
     - | Gets an unmodifiable list of inserted items, or an empty list if there
         were no items inserted.

   * - ``getMatchedCount()``

>      - | Returns the number of documents matched by updates or replacements in the write operation..

Reviewer: S: remove extra period
```suggestion
     - | Returns the number of documents matched by updates or replacements in the write operation.
```

   * - ``getModifiedCount()``
     - | Returns the number of documents modified by the write operation.

   * - ``getUpserts()``
     - | Gets an unmodifiable list of upserted items, or an empty list if there
         were no items upserted.

   * - ``unacknowledged()``

>      - | Creates an unacknowledged BulkWriteResult.

Reviewer: S: [nit] monospace this class name
```suggestion
     - | Creates an unacknowledged ``BulkWriteResult``.
```

   * - ``wasAcknowledged()``
     - | Returns true if the write was acknowledged.

Additional Information
----------------------

To learn how to perform individual write operations, see the following guides:

- :ref:`java-rs-write-insert`
- :ref:`java-rs-write-update-docs`
- :ref:`java-rs-write-replace`
- :ref:`java-rs-write-delete-docs`

API Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To learn more about any of the methods or types discussed in this

> guide, see the following API Documentation:

Reviewer: S: lowercase "Documentation"
```suggestion
guide, see the following API documentation:
```

If any of the write operations in an unordered bulk write fail, the {+driver-short+}
reports the errors only after attempting all operations.

.. note::

   Unordered bulk operations do not guarantee order of execution. The order can
   differ from the way you list them to optimize the runtime.

Return Value
------------

The ``bulkWrite()`` method returns a ``BulkWriteResult`` object. The
``BulkWriteResult`` object contains the following methods:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Method
     - Description

   * - .. code-block:: none
          :copyable: false

           acknowledged(int insertedCount,
           int matchedCount,
           int removedCount, Integer modifiedCount,
           List<BulkWriteUpsert> upserts,
           List<BulkWriteInsert> inserts)

     - | Indicates if the server acknowledged the write operation.
   
   * - .. code-block:: none
          :copyable: false

           acknowledged(com.mongodb
           .internal.bulk
           .WriteRequest.Type type,
           int count,
           Integer modifiedCount,
           List<BulkWriteUpsert> upserts,
           List<BulkWriteInsert> inserts)

>      - | Indicates if the server acknowledged the write operation.

Reviewer 2: These methods do not indicate anything, they create instances of `BulkWriteResult`.

P.S. I think that duplicating the Java API documentation in the driver docs is not only unhelpful, but rather harmful. I also know, that this decision is up to the docs team :)

Reviewer 3: Taking over this PR now that Angela's internship has ended.

Agree that this section feels redundant given that we also link to the `BulkWriteResult` API docs on this page. I'm of the mind to remove this section.

.. _java-rs-bulk-write:

=====================
Bulk Write Operations
=====================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: insert, update, replace, code example

Overview
--------
In this guide, you can learn how to perform multiple write operations in a single database call by using **bulk write operations**.

Consider a scenario in which you want to insert a document into a collection,
update multiple other documents, then delete a document. If you use
individual methods, each operation requires its own database call. This guide

> shows you how to use bulk write operations to perform multiple write operations
> in a single database call.

Reviewer: S: to avoid repeating the wording from the first sentence, you could reword to something like:
```suggestion
shows you how to use bulk write operations to reduce the number of calls to the database.
```
